Upgrade Substrate Document (#102)
digicatapult/dscp-node: Upgrade.md

Upgrade the references to the [paritytech/substrate](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate) repo in each of the workspace cargo.toml files. Doing this it will help ensure that the `cargo build` (as seen below) works and the rest of the process can take place.

You will need to run `rustup` which is [documented here](https://github.com/digicatapult/dscp-node/blob/main/README.md).

# Upgrade Substrate

This [tool](https://crates.io/crates/diener) can be used to update the version fairlessly painlesslly.

After the version updates have been made, depending on the length of time between version releases, there may be a **lot** of changes.

If there are errors you will need to investigate, some may be obvious but it will also be useful to look at the latest version of the branch or use any documentation if available. It may also be worth looking at the [substrate-node-template](https://github.com/substrate-developer-hub/substrate-node-template) to see what what changes they have made when updgrading.

For example, during the `0.9.30` upgrade `Event` and `Origin` became `RuntimeEvent` and
`RuntimeOrigin`. This information was

> obtained from checking the [Polkadot `0.9.31` branch](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/tree/polkadot-v0.9.31). Checking the branch will help with renaming and syntax changes.

Reviewer: `0.9.30`

# Description

This guide will hopefully provide the help and tools to upgrade Substrate in the future.

This is a guide based on updating from `0.9.25` to `0.9.30` and the issues it caused can be seen [here](https://github.com/digicatapult/dscp-node/pull/91/files)

# Prerequisities

Create an **integration** branch which all other branches will be PR'd into. This reduces git issues like having to use `git reset`.

You will need to run `rustup` which is [documented here](https://github.com/digicatapult/dscp-node/blob/main/README.md).

# Upgrade Substrate

This [diener tool](https://crates.io/crates/diener) can be used to update the toml versions fairly painlesslly by upgrading each `cargo.toml` given a specific branch/path.

# Build the Node

To build the Node:

```bash
cargo build --release
```

# Pallets

After the version updates have been made, depending on the length of time between version releases, there may be a **lot** of changes.

> If a file has errors run `cargo check` and it will only check that one file.

Reviewer 2: `cargo check` will actually type check the whole workspace. Not sure what you're getting at here

If there are errors you will need to investigate, some may be obvious but it will also be useful to look at the latest version of the branch or use any documentation if available. It may also be worth looking at the [substrate-node-template](https://github.com/substrate-developer-hub/substrate-node-template) to see what what changes they have made when updgrading.

For example, during the `0.9.30` upgrade `Event` and `Origin` became `RuntimeEvent` and
`RuntimeOrigin`. This information was
obtained from checking the [Polkadot `0.9.30` branch](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/tree/polkadot-v0.9.30). Checking the branch will help with renaming and syntax changes.

[Version changes can be the most difficult parts of the code](https://github.com/digicatapult/dscp-node/pull/91/files#diff-6d40c1b90e071cdb5271cce23374b2ecae20ab264980fda18a4d4d4c290efca1), if you look at the original compared against the new version there could substancial, or minor, changes (depending on the update).

> After the change each pallet needs to be inspected, fixed if needed, along with fixes to tests, ensuring the runtime-benchmarks feature build.

Reviewer 2: what commands do you run to do this?

Once a pallet has been bought up to date it needs to be tested, something like `cargo test -p pallet-transaction-payment-free`, of course change the pallet name to the pallet you are on. If it passes, push it and potentially into it's own PR into the **integration**. If there are errors Rust is very good at highlighting issues and suggesting looking error codes `rustc --explain E0152 `.

## Runtime

> In the Runtime file, lib.rs, roughly line 100, the version must be changed there as a set of numbers, so instead of `5.6.8` it would be `568`, for example `spec_version: 444`

Reviewer 2: how do we validate that the runtime has been updated and works?

> # Description

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# Upgrading Substrate dependencies
```

This guide will hopefully provide help to upgrade Substrate in the future.

This is a guide based on updating from `0.9.25` to `0.9.30` and the issues it caused can be seen [here](https://github.com/digicatapult/dscp-node/pull/91/files)

## Prerequisities

Make sure **main** is up to date and create an **integration** branch which all other branches will be PR'd into. This reduces git issues like having to use `git reset`.

You will need to run `rustup` which is [documented here](https://github.com/digicatapult/dscp-node/blob/main/README.md).

## Upgrade Substrate

> This [diener tool](https://crates.io/crates/diener) (which needs to be in the dependencies) can be used to update the toml versions easily by upgrading each `cargo.toml` given a specific branch/path.

Reviewer 2: what do you mean by "which needs to be in the dependencies"

> ## Build the Node

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Test Building the Node
```

To build the Node:

```bash
cargo build --release
```

> ## Pallets

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Pallets
```

After the version updates have been made, depending on the length of time between version releases, there may be a **lot** of changes.

If a file has errors run `cargo check` and it will only check that one file.

If there are errors you will need to investigate. It would also be worth looking at the [substrate-node-template](https://github.com/substrate-developer-hub/substrate-node-template) to see what what changes they have made when updgrading and potentially compare code changes between different tagged releases of substrate.

For example, during the `0.9.30` upgrade `Event` and `Origin` became `RuntimeEvent` and
`RuntimeOrigin`. This information was
obtained from checking the [Polkadot `0.9.30` branch](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/tree/polkadot-v0.9.30). Checking the branch will help with renaming and syntax changes.

[Version changes can be the most difficult parts of the code](https://github.com/digicatapult/dscp-node/pull/91/files#diff-6d40c1b90e071cdb5271cce23374b2ecae20ab264980fda18a4d4d4c290efca1), if you look at the original compared against the new version there could substancial, or minor, changes (depending on the update).

> After the change each pallet needs to be inspected, fixed if needed, along with fixes to tests, ensuring the runtime-benchmarks feature build.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After the change each pallet needs to be inspected, fixed if needed, along with fixes to tests.   If there are any compilation errors Rust is very good at highlighting issues and suggesting looking error codes e.g. `rustc --explain E0152 `.
```

```bash
cargo build --release --features runtime-benchmarks
```

> Once a pallet has been brought up to date it needs to be tested, something like `cargo test -p pallet-transaction-payment-free`, of course change the pallet name to the pallet you are on. If it passes, push it into it's own PR, then into the **integration**. If there are errors Rust is very good at highlighting issues and suggesting looking error codes `rustc --explain E0152 `.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Once a pallet has been brought up to date it needs to be tested, something like 
`cargo test -p pallet-doas`

If it passes, bump its version in the pallets `pallets/doas/Cargo.toml` push it into it's own PR, then into the **integration** branch
```

> ## Runtime

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Runtime
```

> In the Runtime file, lib.rs, the `spec_version` must be changed to a set of numbers formatted as three digits rather than `5.6.8`, so instead of `5.6.8` it would be `568`, for example `spec_version: 444`.
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We now need to test that the upgraded dependencies work for the runtime including our newly upgraded pallets.  So firstly replace all the pallet versions in the runtime's `runtime/Cargo.toml` and then we need to test a runtime build, we do this by
`cargo build --release -p dscp-node-runtime`

We will need to increment the runtimes `spec_version` to a higher value, note spec_version does not recognize semver, so we treat it as a whole number. e.g. In place of `5.6.8` the `spec_version` would be `568`.

We should also bump our runtime's version in `runtime/Cargo.toml`
```

> If the tests pass create a PR from the **integration** branch.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We should now run the tests for the runtime, which we can do using:

`cargo test --release -p dscp-node-runtime`

If the tests pass create a PR from the **integration** branch.
```

> ## Node

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Node
```

> The last stop in the node section is to update the dscp-node.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The last item to upgrade is the `dscp-node` itself.
```

> There are two steps to undertake, the dscp-node version must be changed and then and then completion of the tests. If this passes then check runtime-benchmarks builds.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There are two steps to undertake, the dscp-node's and dscp-node-runtime's versions should be bumped in `node/Cargo.toml`  and then  we should try to build with the runtime-benchmarks feature enabled.
```

# Upgrading Substrate Dependencies

This guide will hopefully help upgrade Substrate in the future.

This is a guide based on updating from `0.9.25` to `0.9.30` and the issues it caused can be seen [here](https://github.com/digicatapult/dscp-node/pull/91/files)

# First Thing

Create an **integration** branch which all other branches will be PR'd into. This reduces git issues like having to use `git reset`.

> Upgrade the references in the repo. By doing this it will ensure that the `cargo build` (as seen below) works and the rest of the process can take place.

Reviewer: feel like there could be more explanation what 'upgrade the references' means

Reviewer 2: > upgrade the references to the `paritytech/substrate` repo in each of the wrokspaces `cargo.toml` files

?

You will need to run `rustup` which is [documented here](https://github.com/digicatapult/dscp-node/blob/main/README.md).

# Build the Node

To build the Node:

```bash
cargo build --release
```

> # Upgrade Substrate

Reviewer: shouldn't upgrading happen before building the node?

> This [tool](https://crates.io/crates/diener) can be used to update the version fairlessly painlesslly.

Reviewer 2: hang on has this not already been done when upgrading the references

Author: I thought this was upgrading references?

After the version updates have been made, depending on the length of time between version releases, there may be a **lot** of changes.

> If there are errors you will need to investigate, some may be obvious but it will also be useful to look at the latest version of the branch or use any documentation if available.

Reviewer: could mention looking at [substrate-node-template](https://github.com/substrate-developer-hub/substrate-node-template)

> For example, during the `0.9.31` upgrade `Event` and `Origin` became `RuntimeEvent` and

Reviewer: me being super picky but wasn't it an upgrade to `0.9.30`?

For example, during the `0.9.30` upgrade `Event` and `Origin` became `RuntimeEvent` and
`RuntimeOrigin`. This information was

> obtained from checking the [Polkadot `0.9.30` branch](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/tree/polkadot-v0.9.31). Checking the branch will help with renaming and syntax changes.

Reviewer: link goes to `.31` rather than `.30`

# Code Change Example

This code requires a change to the parameter:

```rust
    let doas_root_unchecked_weight_call = DoasCall::doas_root_unchecked_weight { call, weight: 1_000 }
```

Becomes:

```rust
let doas_root_unchecked_weight_call = DoasCall::doas_root_unchecked_weight {
            call,
            weight: Weight::from_ref_time(1_000)
        };
```

[Version changes can be the most difficult parts of the code](https://github.com/digicatapult/dscp-node/pull/91/files#diff-6d40c1b90e071cdb5271cce23374b2ecae20ab264980fda18a4d4d4c290efca1), if you look at the original compared against the new version there could substancial changes (depending on the update).

After the change each pallet needs to be inspected, fixed if needed, along with fixes to tests and ensuring the runtime-benchmarks feature build.

Once a pallet is working it should be put into it's own PR into the **integration**.

## DSCP-Node

> The final pallet to look at is the dscp-node. The first thing to do is update the dscp-node and then follow the previous tests from the other pallets and check runtime-benchmarks builds.

Reviewer: `dscp-node` isn't a pallet, do you mean the `node` directory, which also isn't a pallet?

Reviewer 2: `dscp-node` crate woould be the correct terminology. Pallet is a substrate specific thing refering to a crate (which is rust for library-ish) containing code for a runtime

> Once a pallet is working it should be put into it's own PR into the **integration**.

Reviewer 2: I'd flesh this out. What commands do you run?

> The final node to look at is the dscp-node. The first thing to do is update the dscp-node and then and then complete the tests and check runtime-benchmarks builds.

Reviewer 2: You've skipped updateing the `dscp-runtime`

Author: I've added `And in the Runtime file, roughly line 100, the version must be changed there as a set of three numbers, so instead of `5.6.8` it would be `568` `

# Upgrading Substrate dependencies

This guide will hopefully provide help to upgrade Substrate in the future.

This is a guide based on updating from `0.9.25` to `0.9.30` and the issues it caused can be seen [here](https://github.com/digicatapult/dscp-node/pull/91/files)

## Prerequisities

Make sure **main** is up to date and create an **integration** branch which all other branches will be PR'd into. This reduces git issues like having to use `git reset`.

You will need to run `rustup` which is [documented here](https://github.com/digicatapult/dscp-node/blob/main/README.md).

## Upgrade Substrate

This [diener tool](https://crates.io/crates/diener) can be used to update the toml versions easily by upgrading each `cargo.toml` given a specific branch/path

`cargo install diener`

> and in the root of the `dscp-node` directory run `diener update --substrate --branch polkadot-v0.9.<var>`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
and in the root of the `dscp-node` directory run `diener update --substrate --branch polkadot-v<version>`
```

This [diener tool](https://crates.io/crates/diener) can be used to update the toml versions easily by upgrading each `cargo.toml` given a specific branch/path

`cargo install diener`

> and in the root of the `dscp-node` directory run `diener update --substrate --branch polkadot-v0.9.{version}`

Reviewer 3: If we are going to make something a var we generally use <var> for a CLI argument

## DSCP-Node

> The final node to look at is the dscp-node. There are several steps to do now, the dscp-node version must be changed and then and then complete the tests and check runtime-benchmarks builds. And in the Runtime file, roughly line 100, the version must be changed there as a set of numbers, so instead of `5.6.8` it would be `568`, for example `spec_version: 444`

Reviewer 3: `the final node to look at is the dscp-node` This makes no sense.
